Charadriiform birds drink salt water, as well as fresh water, as they possess exocrine glands located in supraorbital grooves of the skull by which salt can be excreted through the nostrils to assist the kidneys in maintaining electrolyte balance.[16] Gulls are highly adaptable feeders that take a wide range of prey opportunistically. The food taken by gulls includes fish, and marine and freshwater invertebrates, both alive and already dead; terrestrial arthropods and invertebrates such as insects and earthworms; rodents, eggs, carrion, offal, reptiles, amphibians, seeds, fruit, human refuse, and even other birds. No gull species is a single-prey specialist, and no gull species forages using only a single method. The type of food depends on circumstances; terrestrial prey, e.g. seeds, fruit and earthworms, is more common during the breeding season, while marine prey is more common in the nonbreeding season when birds spend more time on large bodies of water.[13]

Hartlaub's gull foot paddling, Cape Town
Black-tailed gulls following a ferry in Matsushima, Japan
Gulls not only take a wide range of prey, they also display great versatility in how they obtain it; prey can be caught in the air, on water, or on land. A number of hooded species are able to hawk insects on the wing, although the larger species perform this feat more rarely. Gulls on the wing snatch items both off the water and off the ground, and they are able to plunge-dive into water to catch prey. Smaller species are more manoeuvrable and better able to hover-dip fish from the air. Dipping is common when birds are sitting on the water, and gulls may swim in tight circles or foot paddle to bring marine invertebrates up to the surface.

Food is also obtained by searching the ground, often on the shore among sand, mud or rocks. Larger gulls tend to do more feeding in this way. Gulls may also engage in foot paddling in shallow water for invertebrates[17] or on wet grass for earthworms.[18] One method of obtaining prey involves dropping heavy shells of clams and mussels onto hard surfaces.[13] Gulls may fly some distance to find a suitable surface on which to drop shells, and there is evidently a learned component to the task because older birds are more successful than younger birds.[19] While overall feeding success is a function of age, the diversity in both prey and feeding methods is not. The time taken to learn foraging skills may explain the delayed maturation in gulls.